[Applause]
thank you great well thank you so much
and it's great to be on stage with you
they're good my fish so your book is
I'll start out but by the way when
they've told us that we would be
following an event with Caitlyn Jenner I
almost reconsidered because it's a tough
act to follow but we're going we're
going to do our best your book just to
start from the very beginning you get it
created - Priya Bella Mukherjee and
Carrie buck and those stories I realized
that late and reading the book but it
makes a lot of sense because their story
is really suffuse the book and well me
or another and I'm just curious why did
you choose to look at the story of jeans
through those stories and you can can
you tell us a bit about both of them
sure the the way that I the way that I
thought about this book this book came
to me because of a series of questions
that were part of my first book the
interval analogies what there were
really three strands that come together
in this book and this brings us to carry
buckin and my grandmother fable analogy
the first strand is the was the
astonishing changes in technology
particularly around genetics so let me
illustrate that idea just really you
really need to understand it if say your
genome was written in script and printed
on a piece of paper it would and it
would be in written down as a book it
would be about seventy full volumes of
the Encyclopedia Britannica's a seventy
full sets of the Encyclopedia Britannica
and so every room in this auditorium
every wall so in this order
would be lined with the encyclopedia of
your genome and if you picked out you
know book 17 incest 64 looked at page 7
it would read ACTG CCT CCC GGG etcetera
etcetera and of course it gets
chemically modified beyond this set but
that would be the core code of
instructions and yet your first cell
knows how to build you out of that core
set of instructions so that was known
now for a long time but what had begun
to change in the last 10 audios and we
were following at as a scientist as a
physician I was following this because
these technologies were coming into my
own hands and into my own laboratory we
began to as we as a community of human
being scientists began to discover
technologies that allow us now to
understand the beginnings wasn't far
from the full extent would understand
the beginnings of what this code means
for an individual human being so for
instance you can now predict if your
child is likely to have Huntington's
disease or cystic fibrosis in a way that
you couldn't certainly 50 or 100 years
ago but more importantly we were
inventing technologies that allow us and
it really boggles the mind so let me
just be clear about it
inventing technology that allow us to go
into volume 17 in set 364 or whatever it
might be and go to page 86 and erase one
word and switch it to another word it
these that technology obviously affects
the way we think about ourselves you
this is a machine that now began to
learn its own codes of instructions by
this I mean human beings our machines
that have begun
learn the codes of the manual is
becoming open to us so the question was
how who has stewardship of the manual is
it you is it me how do we make sense of
that moment in which you begin to
understand begin to decipher the manual
of your own instructions so that those
that that was one strand if it's ort of
felt as if it was you had to write about
it I had to write about it as a solution
as a scientist because it seemed to me
that these technologies would make the
current concerns about other
technologies you know social media
etcetera seemed totally trivial totally
entirely trivial so so that was one
strand the second strand was all of that
information was not funneling into my
clinical practice through cancer so
trying to understand you know you could
you can sequence the active parts of a
cancer genome for an individual patient
how would that affect our the way we
thought about patients etc that was the
second strand but perhaps the most
important strand is the one you're
talking about which is that my own
family has a history of genetic illness
in it an illness that we don't fully
understand and illness where there's
definitely role of the environment
there's definitely some rule of chance
but skip the Fenian bipolar disorder
have crossed multiple generations as I
wrote this book I had a cousin who was
institutionalized
and permanently institutionalized in the
hospital for having schizophrenic for
having a kind of a deep variant of a
schizophrenic disorder so this history
wasn't foreign to me this was my story
and so those three strands came together
in this book now why Carrie buck why my
grandmother Carrie buck was many of you
know people who read the book certainly
know but this was this was knowledge
that's been around in the history books
of the United States Carrie buck was a
woman who was sterilized for supposedly
carrying a gene for
imbecility or stupidity people have
feeble-mindedness
it turns out when you look through her
story when you look through history it
was largely nonsense there was no such
thing but she by state mandate
she was sterilized because as Oliver
Wendell Holmes opined he said three
generations of imbeciles is enough so it
was an attempt to purify to cleanse the
American racial gene pool from Kari
bucks imbecility and so against her own
wishes she was taken to an operating
room and her ovaries were removed in
order to prevent her genetic lineage
from being carried forward because she
was thought to be one of the people who
was contaminating the otherwise healthy
american gene pool so that moment is our
moment we are inheritors of that history
we can't forget it we can't bury it
under the blankets as we move forward
into this genetic future where we can
supposedly you know change the active
parts of our genome or parts of our
genome read and write the genome and so
that that there was a there was and she
resisted the idea she protested and and
ultimately was you know was taken to
this moment of sterilization against her
will
this idea of resisting one's genetic
future of thinking about our own
identity and fate in different ways in
perhaps more humane ways was something
that my grandmother also embodied
because she too had to weather the
buffets of her genetic history so these
that's the reason these two people come
together in the beginning of the book in
fact when I first wrote the first draft
of the book began with Carrie buck
she was mean she opened the book and I
felt that so the book began sort of like
a foot with a kind of cold slap in your
face
and eventually I moved carried back to
the middle because I felt that people
wouldn't even be able to enter the
history it was such a you know again it
was such a cold wash in your face that
less than you know hundred years ago in
this country where we now speak about
freedom and equality and and and and the
idea of a evidence as a mechanism of
intervening or thinking about
intervening on individuals fates that
you would have a woman who was
sterilized against her will for carrying
actually no real sign of genetic
imbecility so that's a very long answer
to a question but but it really tells
you about the archive of this particular
book one of the things that's that I
didn't know before reading that part of
your book is the the lengths that they
went to to try to establish evidence in
this case they felt that they needed for
example to have evidence from her
daughter that it was three generations
and the testimony is amazing it's like
involving she has this look and that
that's presented as evidence in the
pseudo scientific sort of way in which
was approached as pretty glowing and and
and of course the reason and in fact
some of this is reproduced verbatim in
the book from the original case which
you can read about and the transcript of
the case exists and I decided that you
know truth is not just stranger than
fiction is often more chilling and so I
decided to reproduce it verbatim in the
book because you want to know what
happened what did the lawyers say you
know put it in put it in the context of
your own you know let's talk about
ourselves what if what if someone were
to say to me
Kushina you have this genetic history of
schizophrenia
maybe we should control and figure out
what children you should have in
shouldn't have or even or make it even
more provocative let's say I would tell
you that in five years we would begin to
have technologies that
allow you to diagnose the possibility of
a child having a future risk of autism
let's say debilitating autism at the
risk of 10% so based on the read of the
genome the the chance that you charge
the debilitating variant of water that
was 10% how many of you would not who
choose not to carry that child and the
answer would be there are people in the
audience who would in this audience I
know every audience that I've spoken to
would decide not to carry that child
what if that number is 50%
what are the number 70% what if like me
you had you were you began to have the
opportunity again 10 years 15 years from
now to diagnose based on genetic
sequencing a propensity of a child in my
family to have schizophrenia what if you
made that diagnosis before the child had
any symptoms that I have two daughters
what if only one of them both are
healthy what if one of them turned out
to carry that mark would it change the
way you thought about them in the future
you know they're they're men and women
in in the world where only one child
based on on on their genetic is only one
child will have a future risk of
Huntington's disease do they keep treat
those two children you know right now
the controller identical three children
will be treat those children differently
should we so very very very quickly
these questions penetrate into who we
are how will we think about ourselves in
in five 10 what will 15 years from now
what will our children think once we
acquire once they acquire even deeper
capacities to intervene on things that
clearly although not unilaterally but
clearly influence that diffuse aspects
of ourselves diffuse aspects of our
identity diffuse aspects of how we think
about ourselves as I said the
fundamental question what happens when a
machine begins to decipher its own
Mangalore
so this jumps ahead in discussion a
little bit but neither you mentioned the
idea of you know sort of eradicating a
condition before the fact before someone
is born you know in some ways the
history of gene therapy new you go
through it in the book quite a bit to
some exciting things in the last few
decades it's one of expectation of great
ruin and or great promise and not a lot
of delivery on those things to some
extent remember going through and trying
to see if we could find evidence that
there were fewer Down syndrome children
born now for example that definite is
actually a little hard to come by right
so I wonder if if you think are we being
lulled into a sense of false security in
the fact that some of these slopes
haven't been slipped down and that some
of these things have not happened yet or
is it a function of the technology just
becoming to the point now where those
things are more realistic that we should
fear them so I think some slopes have
been very much slipped down and PCC to
use your language in parts of the world
many of you might know there are eight
hundred female infants to a thousand
male infants it doesn't you don't need
me to tell you that's a profoundly
unnatural ratio and that is a in large
part although we don't know exactly that
is in large part because of a
combination of genetic selection in
other words let me just is to be very
clear about it the abortion of female
children babies and some degree of
neglect of early female babies as well
in either way either however you do it
that is a dis genic process it's
eugenics in its grotesque form and it's
already happened it's not as if we're
thinking about the future of eugenics
people say oh you know what what have we
come into a future of eugenics and I say
we'll go to you know go to go to
northern India or China parts of China
you will see the future of personalized
human eugenics right there
you don't need to you know you need to
dream about you know changing the
encyclopedia of genetic instruction so
some slopes have already been flipped
down
the promise of the potential to create
cure terrible human diseases also is
being realized sickle cell disease and
now multiple attempts at correcting with
the genetics of in in blood stem cells
this is work that a light or what I do
in my own medical and laboratory
practice I'm a hematologist so so on so
on the other hand the capacity to to
really have powerful effects on on human
lives what you're talking about is that
the promise is still in the future the
technologies are evolving evolving
rapidly what I did not mention in that
suite of technologies that I talked
about reading and writing genetic
information the one thing that did not
mention was making strands of DNA
chromosomes human chromosomes from
scratch as a chemical in other words now
potentially if you could achieve that
you wouldn't have to go and erase things
written into a human chromosome you
could build it you could write it from
scratch like writing a novel obviously
you know each one of these technologies
has limitations but as I said the
fundamental idea that that we are
beginning to open that book to read it
to write it and change it is must be has
to be one of the most important
technological advances in human history
and brings with it of course all the
challenges that that really radical
technologies bring yeah you put it in
the context of the great fundamental
sort of ideas and entities or the 20th
century being the gene the bite and the
atom ran down these these three and
certainly it's in that yes a class to
them so I want to get back to where
things are going in the field and some
looming issues but you know just to
circle back for a second to the personal
component of the book because you know
what what I really love
about your book is something that to be
honest annoys me about some Hollywood
movies that deal with science but it's
great in your book because you know
sometimes when Hollywood
believe me when Hollywood will go into a
scientific subject it's there's
sometimes an apologetic tone to it like
you know we have to put in some personal
interest in this world people won't
watch it you know so we'll throw in a
love interest or you know family
conflict and sometimes that's made up
out of whole cloth just so that you can
tell the story a little more easily but
here it's it's fundamental to the
subject right I mean like it's you have
the quote from from Homer in the
beginning that your your parents blood
is not lost in you it's late at night
that's about inheritance right it's
about mothers and fathers and who you
have children with and you know your
ancestors your descendants and you know
some very fundamental things about human
nature so that sort of leads into you
you have a very evocative word in this
book that I had not heard of before but
I think is a way of getting into subject
that's a little different and I ask you
how to pronounce it abate could you talk
a little bit about abate and what that
your father talked about it to you and
what that sort of means to you
personally yeah it's a it's a very
interesting and complicated word and it
certainly sends a kind of chill up when
I think about it my father passed away
in last six months so sort of personal
reflection on him too but there is no
Bengali word for gene and there's a
moment in the book when my father takes
me back to Calcutta where he came as a
refugee as a young boy and he's looking
for a word for the word gene and he
knows he knows what it generally should
sound like or be like sound like but
what the concept should convey and
ultimately thinks awhile and he says the
word should be upheld which means the
indivisible that something that can be
removed from yourself a unit that can
removed out of yourself and of course
it's a very lovely work from Sanskrit
which refers to the idea of that which
is essential to you that which is
indivisible that which is so much a part
of you but it cannot be removed it is it
is beyond the visibility which of course
is it is has resonances in the idea of
the atom beyond the visibility atomistic
the idea of the bite or the bit really
of information you can't divide one and
zero
further they become unitary at that
place and ultimately the idea of the
gene because you you can certainly look
and decipher what a gene is made of but
there's a unit unitary quality to it it
is a unity it occurs in itself so these
deep resonances which keep coming up
over and over again in ways that are
important
then comes the then comes the last
chapter of the book because I didn't
have in this book I have no idea how to
finish this book and I I tried an X
while I wrote various ways to end the
book I try to go back to Calcutta to try
to see my cousin in the it what my
father used to call the lunatic asylum
because he had relaxed words for it and
he was so ashamed of carrying this kind
of germinated seed of a flaw inside
there was two of his brothers two of his
brothers two of his brothers and in one
of his his nephew his oldest brother
Sonny Bono's so so I tried to finish
this book and I was trying and I tried
that's right and then I remembered years
ago reading actually listening to a
strand of music where that word paid was
used and I'll just read it to you
because I'm going to forget otherwise
exist this strand of music was kind of a
dancing because this was a it was an
extract from a Sanskrit poem then may
you know translated into colloquial
language and the epilogue is called head
of it so obviously the word paid is the
opposite of a bid in two states to up
Haden translates into eight and that
means discrimination to discriminate
divide to distinguish the cut apart and
the poem when I translate it I'd heard
it so many times but when I translated
all of a sudden made so many things
clear then the the poem would read the
translation you can read the original in
the in the book it says show me that you
can divide the notes of a song but first
show me that you can discern between
what can be divided and what cannot you
should spend look we should spend some
time thinking about that idea this was
written in Sanskrit in you know thousand
dollar years ago maybe two thousand
years ago but this idea that what is the
visibility mean for us human beings and
you know think about this in the context
of the gene what if I told you that we
were comprised of these units that we
had these unitary cat gene variations
that we inherited that governed our form
fit and function interacted with the
environment interact with chance but
laid powerful constraints on our future
and identity right what if I told you
that these were units and that you could
change pieces of this in a unitary
manner which you could not do it they
were all interlinked together if they
were all meshed up together in some kind
of whirlpool or spool you couldn't take
part a and excise it or or eliminate it
so the the aspiration of human eugenics
the aspiration of off trying to
manipulate genes arises as a direct
consequence of the fact that their units
as opposed to all in mesh together and
yet we also know that they are in mesh
together that they don't act alone they
act with each other
so there you have the fundamental
contradiction of what what the new
genetics is telling us that these things
are axed together and yet they're
divisible and separate up hey Dan hey
you know this contrasts with each other
and so I'm now going to read you again
this this this this thing which really
took me because I heard this I heard
this song it was you yeah you can find
on YouTube actually I've heard the song
maybe a hundred times in my life and
then all of a sudden I was writing the
last chapter of the book and I said to
myself someone 1500 years ago wrote this
show me that you can divide the notes of
a song but first showing that you can
discern between what can be divided and
what cannot it's an astonishing idea and
of course a very important idea in in
the 21st century yeah
and it reminds me to of something in the
book where you talk about actually
gender identity and sexual preference
and sort of the story of research into
the genetic component of that and one of
the things that was striking was that
and this is out me I think I think a lot
of us sort of understand this
intuitively but that by by portraying
these things as in some way based in
genetics that that kind of helped
normalize it and for some people right
but that that was seen as better than if
they were being chosen in some way and
of course the fact that now if you can
choose the genetics is a different layer
to it I mean I think we're obviously
entering a new era of choice the choice
is now being the word choices again the
meaning of choice is changing how we
choose to describe choice is changing
there's a line in the book whereas a
choice sometimes seems like an illusion
devised by genes to allow us to choose
genes and that's not a laughing matter
since in fact as we move into an era
where the idea of choosing
your child's genome becomes more tactile
becomes more palpable becomes
potentially more real and I don't mean
choosing your child's genome you know I
don't mean you know I mean small things
that were already doing choosing not to
have a child with Down syndrome is
choosing a genome choosing to have a
child with male versus female is
choosing a genome choosing a child that
does not have Huntington's disease or
the marker country genes that would
predispose this child in 30 years time
to have Hunter's disease is choosing a
genome of the woman I wrote a piece
about this recently a woman I was at a
conference at a cancer conference and I
stepped off the podium and and the woman
said you know I have a history of breast
cancer in my family I have the bracket
one gene mutation the gene variant that
increases risk of breast cancer
I would like never to have I would like
my children never to suffer the
consequences that I went through of you
know bilateral mastectomy hormone
therapy chemotherapy etcetera etcetera
how can you not be sympathetic to that
idea so how can you not say that in
certain circumstances we should be
choosing certain genomes and yet on the
other hand looms carry buck
yet on the other hand looms the idea
that if we had unlit agait t'do to do
this what would happen next
Francis Collins and I the gene was the
NIH is the first Institute wide read
reading read book you know it's a new
program that was launched at the NIH
which in which they choose one book of
through the year and they read it one
week one Radian and we were on stage and
Frances we were just sort of finishing
our conversation and he said he's
talking asked a question which I wasn't
expecting he said what do you think what
normal human shape do you think is going
to go first
and I sort of thought for about for a
while and I said I mean gender aside
which has already gone down the slope as
it were
I said height and all of you might have
your own answers first of all the
question is what's normal right
you know we would be answers we don't
know and the book much of the book has
questions tries to know like a mouse at
the roots of what is normal I don't have
the answers I provide some thoughts
about it but so those questions are but
I think I will go first I will be the
you know the new get the first entrance
into Gattaca Empress Frances Collins
known for his work on cystic fibrosis
because and you know that's a condition
that to my knowledge has no positive
benefit for society would be great if
people don't have to worry about them
but you know in somewhere it's a natural
condition of people is to have high
let's pause for a second oh please you
said something very important yeah which
we need to question a little bit please
you said cystic fibrosis there's no net
natural them for society well okay
since cystic fibrosis gene the gene
variant that causes cystic fibrosis we
think we don't know this comes into
existence because of cholera it was
selected we think that all strong
evidence with is that in societies where
color work where color and other
gastrointestinal diseases rage gram
particular population having that
mutation actually protected children in
in when we had one copy of the mutation
those children were protected from
cholera
so how easily in 2017 the idea of cystic
fibrosis has no benefit
slips off our tongue it does right and
yes in evolutionary history you know you
would be so lucky right
to have one copy but not the second copy
but one copy of the mutant gene that
means a great example of how quickly our
because environments change because
societies change how quickly we
we change you know what our eugenic
aspirations are and we didn't plan that
I fell right into that so and in sickle
cell meaning does it say anything
it's the parasite help me out here
the name is molarity right so sickle
cell anemia is thought to have maybe had
some benefit from malaria a number of
other genetic disorders that might have
some basis also be bad for one right
right so so that gets to a question I
was thinking of bringing up later which
is you know that we have this idea of an
eye just filament of genetic differences
or disorders as being in some way
subsets or you know sort of deviations
from the normal right and and that
there's the normal and then there's
something less than that and they
obtained in these in these things but
you bring up the point that some of the
genes that affect things like
schizophrenia and in other conditions
there are benefits to that too right
there are aspects of faculties that
might be enhanced by the same thing that
causes all these problems so none of
them very straightforward many of them
are you know so again we have to use
some obviously and we mean you're you're
referring to this idea we always have to
use some discretion in to end some
discrimination later ed in talking about
you know there are two strands to this
right so if there are conditions as
you're very well pointing out which
we're inheriting that that genetic
mutation doesn't seem to have any
ameliorative effects you know a child
with a debilitating for form of autism
you know we really we're compelled to
ask the question why why should we not
remove this from the human gene pool so
again it really depends on thinking
about the deep consequence of each
individual piece of this s core right
and of course you know you have the
natural state of our species is to have
high infant mortality rates and to have
no recourse when we get cancer and all
these other things that
we're very happy that medicines provide
answers what's natural what's natural
what is it not yet what are they
naturally exactly right so and that's
the state of anything all right yeah so
so you know hundreds or thousands of
years ago that that's what would have
happened right and so it's a good thing
that we've changed those but that's so
so one thing that you talked about in
this book that's that's interesting is
just the way that the ideas about
genetics and and what is a gene what's
the unit of inheritance have changed so
much over time and maybe in some ways as
a cautionary tale of salability
of very smart people who got it
completely wrong starting with whoever
you want to start with but you know
Darwin had a very wrongheaded idea of
what heredity amounts to so how did that
fit into the arc of the book for you
yeah so you know this was a strange book
to write partly because the first half
of this book really is a set up like a
theatrical set up for the second half of
the book in this particular book I
really want it's very different in
structure from the Emperor of all
maladies of the laws of medicine which
are very different structurally this is
this is a harder book to write and and
because the payoff comes at the end and
I think the payoff is rich at the end I
hope it is otherwise you can read it but
but the payoff comes at the end because
the payoff comes with questions about
you know now that we know what do we do
about it so the second full half of the
book is that the first of the book is
very condensed it's a condensed history
we zoom through decades through era and
I didn't want to dwell too long because
I didn't want again to be I just wanted
to get to the meat of the opposite of a
second other questions you know I'll
just give you a couple of highlights of
that of the of the deep past of genetics
it's interesting so for the longest time
and I think I'm sure people in this
audience remember this or maybe think
this themselves for longest time people
you know the idea of heredity was very
intuitive for the long
time people thought that you know you
were kind of wearing blender of your
parents um your parents your mother had
certain characteristics your father -
characteristics they got mixed together
and you became you and it makes a lot of
intuitive sense you know your skin color
is often the average of your mother and
father your height is an average your
hair color your hair formation etc is an
average but of course it took a few
philosophers of the ancient world a
figure that couldn't be true because if
that were true how would you explain
gender come with me
you know that we're it creates it
creates an immediate philosophical
problem because why aren't all of us the
average of our parents sexual anatomy
our parents generous gender gender
identity and so forth so obviously
something more was at play and if you
think deeply about that in fact what's
astonishing about it in retrospect this
idea that Mendel had that that
information must be moving in an
indivisible form is apparent from gender
itself right if you really think about
it they think about it for a second how
else could it work how else could you
guarantee that you would have male and
female not across one generation because
generation after generation after
generation how else could it possibly
work unless there was some one piece two
pieces 10 pieces whatever it might be
the number is irrelevant was moving
individually across generations that it
wasn't being diluted out hopefully
because otherwise you know you can it
you know Anatomy would collapse sexual
dimorphism would collapse and so what so
so if you're the oldest idea was that it
was all a monkey was right that's right
very honest illustration in the book the
the oldest idea was that you know there
was none of this was true so the oldest
idea was that you came completely
preformed and you were you know sort of
a little baby in the sperm lily he
folded human being in the sperm and your
mother just added water basically so
blew up and became your manifest self
soil exactly so the female in this
version was a kind of intravenous
nutrient bag and the male was that there
was a trim and of course if you think
about that that makes also no sense for
the same reasons I just told you if the
male specified it the idea was that the
homunculus gathered information from the
body and therefore formed itself like by
picking out information but it's a
homunculus in the in the case of a
female child where did the homunculus
get the information to make its an enemy
if it was although a very evocative ID I
have to say like in some ways because
like I think one of the things you point
out is that in religious terms it
implies that if you believe this right
that atom contained all future human
beings and that there was there was a
beginning that that also experienced
original sin and that there is a an
expected end to that that line which is
kind of neat if it worked that way but
it doesn't and that's why you shouldn't
believe it everything the egg one
worries like I said leave it so the as
you said you go from this saga of
understanding what the gene is to to the
task of which has become you know
greater and greater in recent decades of
gene therapy and and where that's
heading and what the moral foundation is
for that so if you could just um you
know where has gene therapy to your mind
sort of gone in the last few decades and
and where does it stand now you
I think you have a pretty clear view
that we're potentially at a precipice of
some much more powerful techniques than
existed before
so if absolutely so I mean just to give
you a little bit of a primer on on the
idea again much of this is in greater
detail in the book for the long you know
once we had figured out what genes were
how they where they were located how
they manifest themselves in the body etc
you could imagine ways in which you
could take disease
issue what did it with the tissue with
circle disease at the consequence of a
gene genetic mutation and you could put
a gene a foreign gene into that tissue
carried by a virus for instance and this
was of course the way gene therapy was
imagined in the in the 1990s and early
2000s that say you had cystic fibrosis
so your whole body every cell in your
body has the mutant version - in this
case - mutant versions of the gene but
mainly the disease's manifests in your
lungs although this manifests in other
organs as well so the goal of gene
therapy was you know what if we could
put the right gene into the lungs at
least and then the lungs would start
functioning again so this idea is called
somatic gene therapy and it's important
to know those words somatic gene therapy
refers to the idea that that your soma
or your body is being affected but your
germline is not being affected but the
genes don't go into your sperm and eggs
you would still have people with that
especially if you if such a fragile
treated with this gene therapy in the
case of cystic fibrosis were to have his
or her child that's I would never have
that gene corrected right it would still
be they would still have the parental
version of whatever the gene genes were
and there have been some seminal
successes in somatic gene therapy
although they've been big challenges as
well the biggest challenge is that it's
pretty hard to deliver genes into the
human body the body doesn't seem to be
particularly happy receiving viruses for
instance it so it's not it's tricky to
do it you can and they've been some
important successes sickle cell disease
being potentially one of them but and
you know other hemophilia blood
disorders being others in which they've
been attempted but they've not been so
somatic gene therapy has important
advantages separate from somatic gene
therapy is a much more provocative and
controversial idea and that it's
germline gene therapy what if you could
now change
sperm and eggs in a way that you
wouldn't be you could change the genetic
information you could either deliver
genes into them or you could
make corrections changes edit the genes
of swimmin eggs now that idea was
considered a pipe ring people thought
this was impossible that we'd never find
technology to do this and then something
surprising happened and you go through
the in the book and you really need to
you need to go through the story to
figure out why surprising so the idea
that you could deliberately change you
know as I said before it deliberately
change word 35 in paragraph 4 of volume
17 and set 62 change
g-g-gee to CCC was thought impossible
you know you can't tell a cosmic ray
which causes mutations you can't go and
changes that you can't say if you cut
out an x-ray you know go and change just
that you have no control and then
something very very very strange happen
it was serendipitous and it was a
discovery it turns out that bacteria in
exactly live under so the rough edges of
the of the world right to living the
hard side of the tracks they're
constantly being invaded by other other
organisms particularly viruses and so
bacteria have evolved we didn't know
anything about this this was totally
hidden to us but over millennia bacteria
have evolved mechanisms to resist
viruses and we knew some of these
mechanisms before and they were very
tantalizing one mechanism of the vector
had evolved to resist viruses they would
cut the virus DNA as it was trying to
invade the bacteria again we knew about
this we knew a lot about this Nobel
prizes were awarded for this information
etc and then it turned out that many
scientists were as we should identify
Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuel Charpentier
discovered that this system was
programmable in other words you could
program the system and in fact bacteria
had learned to program this
so that they could chop a piece of DNA
based on its sequence in add in a
directional manner It was as if it had
told not a cosmic ray but a bacterial
system said go and find that sequence
and cut it and you'll be able to you
know and that's that's the way that you
can you know recognize it that that
virus is coming and invading you now it
just takes two steps to figure out where
we're going with this which is it that
Korea can learn to do this
why don't we reengineer that system to
allow human cells to do this so in other
words why don't we reengineer human
cells to say go to volume 17 page
whatever whatever set whatever whatever
cuts that piece of information and
potentially change that piece of
information using some intrinsic
properties of cells so these are the new
this is the kind of gene therapy that's
sort of coming and not horizon which is
the potential to to have germline gene
therapy and just before we finish up let
me just let me just tell you one thing
which is an important thing the National
Academy of Sciences actually after I
finish this book about a month ago
released a report which you should
really know so the National Academy of
Sciences was asked many panels have been
asked I've been involved in some of them
but I was not at the National hairy
panel but many channels have been asked
should be limitless and the National
Academy of Sciences for the first time
in human history said for diseases that
cause extraordinary suffering if we
really think that you know it for
diseases are caused extraordinary
suffering as long as there's no other
justifiable intervention that we should
be that scientists should be allowed to
consider germline human gene therapy
gene editing that is a big deal many of
us that profit us that the Academy would
say no stop but it decided it's a big
deal so the question is what is
extraordinary suffering who decides you
know is it extraordinary to be a woman
in a society there where you know women
do face extraordinary suffering is that
now is it extraordinary suffering to
have the bracket one gene mutation who
defines it so the panel has told that
the standard with that standard it sells
when you when you examine it becomes you
know becomes a question leads to a
series of questions and of course we're
not talking about some irrelevant thing
like social media we're talking about
I'm joking okay great but we're talking
about the stewardship of the thing that
defines us as Ewing right so if we don't
know the vocabulary if you don't
understand the words we don't we don't
participate in this conversation we're
going to be left out and as you say you
know one of the principles of
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis has
been that there should be a very high
likelihood that the genie question would
cause yes some kind of disorder well who
defines now yeah ten percent for some
people would be high for others who
would be different so how are we on
times we need we have time for Q&A
okay any questions yeah Donna final
front down okay there's two microphones
roving around here I'll try to go to as
many as I can let's start with back here
can you pass this over great that sir
sir I appreciated a dialogue on
normative behavior and kind of what
norms are and twice you kind of poked at
social media which was funny but this
new book sapiens that's out sort of
takes a twist on normative zhh and you
know imagination how this happen and
it's sort of interesting to think about
you know kind of the social media world
is developing our norms and reflecting
them on us visa vie our genetics as well
because there's a sort of you know a
computer social world that's happening
that reflects our ideas too so I'm just
curious if you think about how ideas
exist in that world and then how I you
know atomic expressions exist in genes
and how those two interplay
by the new book you mean Hamid is not
sapiens is that correct it so seriously
being taken so in fact so I reviewed
Houma Deus for the New York Times I'm a
big admirer
Ferraris writing I think he said he's a
very thoughtful person on the future so
how these two pieces interact intersects
together the future of it's kind of hard
to define that it little nebulous
entities but the future of let's say
computational algorithms and the future
of biological algorithms how they
intersect with each other both of them
are ultimately information rich systems
if you want a very long answer to that
do read my duty the review not you not
to plug the review because I feel and
what's nice about lying reviews is that
there's no books attached to it please
for meeting you maybe maybe maybe we'll
go and see maybe we're going to read the
hilarious book I don't I didn't agree
with everything with that horizons to
say about how these intersect but I
think the idea is very powerful that
there are two kinds of algorithms as as
look I'm using the word from that book
there two kinds of algorithms that are
intersecting in the future one of them
is genetic I want them as computational
algorithms these two algorithms has a
capacity to anything interplay with each
other so I'll give you one concrete
example how we predict the future of
biological organisms including humans of
course depends on an information-rich
way of thinking about humans so we have
you know if we sequence ten million
genomes maybe 100 million genes I don't
know what the number would have to be
and created a fake map of this looking
forward of humans would we begin to get
get would we have enough power and would
we begin to get information about how
the genome predicts your fate in the
future we have very little glimpses of
this right so we know in a very tiny
edge of that universe that if you
inherit two variants of two mutations
and cystic fibrosis
gene that you will have a disease that
affects your lungs your pancreas and
your sperm right or your spermatic
system I should say that we know if you
have a mutation in a gene called
bracket1 in the future you have a risk
of breast and other kinds of cancers as
well but we don't know this
systematically and particularly don't
need combinatorial which is probably the
most important piece if you have gene
variant a and gene variant C and D but
not l inclusive of X but not like how
this particular combination interacting
together will lead to whatever it might
be that your fate is if that principle
becomes available if these if these
pieces of understanding become
understandable if they become
computationally amenable then you can
imagine an incredible power will be
unleashed on on human beings the
capacity to predict obviously diffuse
aspects of future not just such concrete
things as diseases that we know have
powerful genetic links but much more
diffuse aspects of our future and that
is something to be really thinking about
and I think that's the question that is
raised well I think we're far from that
place but it seems to me that the
technology the individual pieces of
technology which means which are genetic
sequencing creating very rich fate maps
of human beings doing this across
multiple populations and then finding
computational tight enough computational
power to imagine this in what would be
called multi-dimensional space and
figuring out how they predict each other
or whether they do critically these
individual pieces of Technology the data
storage have come to have come to pass
so whether we want to do this or not is
a question is a question that I think
it's worth but raising that idea of the
fate map is very evocative in your book
and I think it gets to the fact that we
know what's both genes an environment
that has an impact on disease and other
things but the effect of environment is
very difficult to quantify and that's
right yeah you know it's an unusual
thing and I'll let this idea rest with
you it's an unusual thing that 50 years
ago people thought that the environment
would be the most malleable component
right
people said oh you know what we really
should focus on is changing the
environment 50 years later our language
is changed we think that gosh you know
the environment too hard to tackle let's
change the genes so I mean that idea
should again should provoke a huge
internal conversation within ourselves
within our societies you know what if
what happens to society which is said
our frustrations with changing and
changing environments has reached a
place where we think that you know let's
change the you know there are two halves
of this equation let's change the other
half potentially that obviously has AI
don't you tell you today's cultural
consequences maybe there's a question
right it's I'm sorry yeah I'll get a
microphone and we are closing in on the
end so just like a minute or two more
please this is somewhat related last
point you were making on you know the
theory about the genetics where do you
fall on the nature versus nurture topic
and then I always think of you know the
movie Gattaca for example think you
called out in this book but um you know
where yeah but as far as nature versus
nurture where you think that goes and
how does this interplay with the whole
concept of jeans and being able to
change your genetic makeup so you know
my own views about this life I do think
that we are discovering more and more
and I hope relatively for some people a
controversial edge of this topic I think
that nurture influences nature in ways
that we haven't fully even discovered
just last week there were three
important papers in model organisms that
yet again show that the effects of
nurture in these model organisms remains
powerful in the case of the warm up to
14 generations I'm quoting the paper
correctly fourteen generations were
influenced so the idea that the
that nature could influence nurture to
use your words not across one generation
not across two but across multiple
generations I think for model organisms
simple model organisms has become
extremely powerful at least very
convincing for me others are not so
convinced to me this is a Hewitt sak
Ontario topic people debate this back
and forth but I think even even last
week's recent spate of papers three you
know highly detailed studies in model
organisms more some in yeast and some in
in worms makes a powerful argument that
this is not to be taken lightly
that phenotypes get reproduced
generation after generation based on an
environmental exposure that the original
or lots of people disagree about this
you know it raises the specter of
Lamarckian evolution which I think has
has many problems of course much of we
know about genetics does not do these
mechanisms but all of this said I think
that the convincing data I think most
people who are deniers of this idea I
really have their heads in the sand we
know we cannot I'm sorry we have to get
to the book signing now yeah Thank You
Jeremy thank you sorry
you
[Applause]